Add paper draft (#8)
UtrechtUniversity/SWORDS-template: paper/paper.md

---
title: "SWORDS: A framework for the Scan and revieW of Open Research Data and Software"
tags:
  - Python
  - data analysis
  - FAIR
  - open science
authors:
  - name: Keven Quach
    orcid: 0009-0002-7017-0331
    equal-contrib: true
    corresponding: true 
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Jonathan de Bruin
    orcid: 0000-0002-4297-0502
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Anna-Lena Lamprecht
    orcid: 0000-0003-1953-5606
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Independent Researcher, Germany
   index: 1
 - name: Utrecht University, Netherlands
   index: 2
 - name: University of Potsdam, Germany
   index: 3
date: 18 June 2023
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

> SWORDS (Scan and revieW of Open Research Data and Software) is a framework designed to provide insights into an organization's open-source activities through a structured approach. The framework is divided into three core stages that can be executed independently:

Reviewer: It might be good to focus on organizations in the research domain here; what do you think? There are quite some developments regarding this topic (see OSPOs and OSPO tooling). This framework is unique because it takes academic publishing principles into account.

Reviewer: It might also be good to introduce our biggest challenge here: decentralized open-source activities. This framework studies open source activities of organizations as well as the open source activities of their members/staff. This is quite unique for this type of tooling I think. 

You explain this briefly in bullet 1 below, but we should also to this in the first sentences I think.

> SWORDS (Scan and revieW of Open Research Data and Software) is a framework designed to provide insights into an organization's open-source activities through a structured approach. The framework is divided into three core stages that can be executed independently:

Reviewer: It might be good to explain why the stages can be executed independently. This might confuse the reader. For example, stage 1 is relevant to organisations not having an overview of the GitHub profiles of their staff. If so, they can execute stage 1.

And variations

1. Finding GitHub user profiles associated with an organization.  
   ![Phase 1](../docs/Phase_1.png){width=50%}
2. Extracting relevant repositories.  
   ![Phase 1](../docs/Phase_2.png){width=50%}
3. Studying the contents of the repositories. Content evaluation includes aspects of quality assessment, documentation availability, and FAIRness [@wilkinson_fair_2016] scores [@Spaaks_howfairis_2022] (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability).  

>    ![Phase 1](../docs/Phase_3.png){width=50%}

Reviewer: I prefer to have the stage titles of the flowcharts aligned with the descriptions of the steps here.

Reviewer: Or maybe simplify the flowcharts by removing outer layers.

> Written in Python, SWORDS provides a template for easy implementation within any organization and focuses on GitHub, which is the go-to reference for mining open-source repositories [@cosentino_systematic_2017]. The framework was applied to Utrecht University as part of a research project [@quach_mapping_2022]. The results of the aforementioned research project were presented at a conference [@quach_keven_2023_8150215]. Ongoing research projects are currently being conducted at the University of Potsdam.

Reviewer: Please also mention that the framework is extensible and flexible, e.g., you can evaluate repositories on custom-defined metrics and collect users according to different strategies.

> # Statement of need

Reviewer: I want to introduce FAIR here in more detail. We lack tooling for the analysis of research output like software and data. Over the years, many initiatives were introduced and especially the introduction of the FAIR principles really contributed to this. Because we now have a better understanding of the publication principles for transparent and reproducible publication of data and software, we can also evaluate and monitor this. This insights can be useful as described in the following paragraph.

Reviewer: Mentioning the Barker 2022 paper is of added value in my opinion.

Reviewer: It might also be good to mention that there is open source monitoring software or OSPO tooling, but this software doesn't fit the academic/research use-case (yet).

Open Science, promoting transparency in academic publications, data, software, and other types of output, is crucial for enhancing scientific and societal impact in today's research climate. The application of Open Science principles to research data and software is vital for ensuring scientific integrity and reproducibility, which can sometimes be lackluster [@allison:2016]. However, substantial challenges persist in tracking, managing, and understanding open-source research software due to the scattered and fragmented nature of these activities across multiple platforms [@lamprecht_towards_2020].

> The SWORDS framework addresses this need by providing a systematic approach to collating, analyzing, and understanding an organization's open-source research software. The insights gained from implementing SWORDS can help organizations connect initiatives, improve quality, reward and recognize contributions, and foster a collaborative and open research environment. Thus, SWORDS presents an invaluable tool for any research organization aiming to improve and gain a better understanding of its open-source activities and drive forward the principles of Open Science.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SWORDS framework addresses this need by providing a systematic approach to collating, analyzing, and understanding an organization's open-source research software. The insights gained from implementing SWORDS can help organizations connect initiatives, improve quality, reward and recognize contributions, and foster a collaborative and open research environment. Thus, SWORDS presents an invaluable tool for any research organization aiming to improve and better understand its open-source activities and drive forward Open Science.
```

# Acknowledgements

> We acknowledge contributions from Christopher Slewe during the genesis of this project.

Reviewer: Please mention the funding programs: OSP and FAIR Research IT.
